---
title: 'Designing Data-Intensive Applications by Martin Kleppmann'
date: 2025-01-06T12:06:03+01:00
draft: true
description: "Documenting my thoughts and learnings from Chapter 1 of DDIA"
series: ['DDIA']
tags: [Data]
---

A friend/colleague suggested I read this in 2022 as it came in handy when he was tasked with building and maintaining systems that were required to be highly available and reliable. I started multiple times over the years but somehow never got past the first chapter only to pick it up over the weekend and actually stick with it.

I've been on a sabbatical for most of 2024 and was passively thinking about where to focus my energies when I'd come back to active development. I considered switching to Systems Engineering when I picked up an interest in learning about the Linux Kernel and dipping my toes into learning the Rust Programming Language. Despite this being interesting, it was also very daunting and the learning gaps had me feeling impatient with the process.

After speaking to another friend who's a Data Engineer and remembering how I'd planned to transition to Data engineering at the end of 2020 before switching gears and pursing the exciting Software Enginering role at Microsoft, it felt like a nobrainer revisiting this again especially because my background as a Data Scientist and experience working as a Software Engineer sets me up nicely to thrive as a Data Engineer.

I don't know how far I'll get this time around with this book that has been quoted to be the holy grail for thinking about and designing data-intensive systems but the plan is to take it a day at a time and try to read ~100 pages weekly.

### Notes on Chapter 1

This was a gentle introduction in how to reason about data-intensive applications. The author explains what makes an application data-intensive as opposed to compute-intensive and the 3 primary concerns of most software systems:

1. Reliability: Applications should work as intended most of the time. Faults should also be anticipated and tolerated i.e failures are inevitable but how do you bounce back?

2. Scalability: The assumption is that most applications want to grow and should anticipate this. What happens when your application gets 10x more users? My key learning from this was selecting the load paramaters that makes the most sense for your application e.g number of site visits/min might not be as useful as number of checkouts/min for an ecommerce store. This example needs work but what I'm trying to explain is that tracking any particular load paramater and trying to decrease said load by scaling up or out the appliation should be beneficial else you might have the wrong parameter or collecting inaccurate data (the eye opener here was that all measurements are inacurate because the tools being used are inaccurate to certain known degrees and are merely estimations)

3. Maintainability: Yes you've built a reliable system that can now handle the extra load being thrown at it really well, but how do you ensure it keeps delivering and that the folks working on it don't want to quit because of how nightmarish it has become? That's where maintainabilty comes in.
